The evolution of western music is easy to see from a broad perspective; given pieces by Lassus, Bach, and Strauss, even an untrained person would have no trouble pointing out differences. A narrower focus makes the development both harder and more rewarding to spot. This paper will discuss the similarities and differences between two six-part consort pieces by Alfonso Ferrabosco the father and son, respectively. One is a madrigal entitled “So Far from My Delight,” while the other lacks lyrics or any title apart from the designation of “Fantasia”; Ferrabosco II wrote many pieces in this genre, so the piece can be considered effectively untitled. The Fantasia is similar enough to a madrigal to be considered an instrumental outgrowth of the genre, yet so different as to clearly hold its own place in the world of renaissance polyphony. This dynamic exists in multiple facets of the pieces, including harmonic progressions at cadences, imitation and homophony, instrumentation, and range, in a sense echoing the father-son relationship of their composers.
A few notes for the reader: hereafter, the Ferraboscos will be referred to as the Elder and Younger, respectively, to avoid confusion. Also, though both pieces were written before tonal music theory had become the norm and composers began thinking in terms of chords, the rules of counterpoint that were in common use at the time do tend to result in chordal structures, especially near (that is, approaching) cadences. Therefore, I have taken the liberty to analyze the pieces as such, as a complement to the period-appropriate analysis concerning imitation and homophony.
	The differences between the two pieces are most evident in the overall structure. This is not surprising because the structure of “So Far from My Delight” is heavily influenced by its lyrics; phrases are relatively short to match the lines of the poem. The younger Ferrabosco, with his instrumental Fantasia, was able to explore a greater variety of phrase lengths and at one point goes an entire 33 measures without cadencing. In general, he cadences much less often and capitalizes on his long phrases by exploring more extended variations and combinations of the motives. In terms of harmonic structure, the differences are also much more apparent on the macro level; every completed cadence in the Fantasia is in C major, while those in the Madrigal include G, D, A, and C. However, if we take a closer look at the cadences themselves, we see strong similarities—as one would expect, considering the geographic and chronological closeness of the two pieces.
To begin, the penultimate chord of every single cadence in both pieces is a V chord with a 4-3 suspension (there are no plagal or half cadences). The suspension may be realized in any of the upper parts and may occur on two half notes on beats 1 and 3 or wait to resolve on beat 4, but regardless of placement, it is always there. An astute observer who has already reviewed the scores may interject at this point that, in fact, there are several cadences that do not use a V chord but rather a ii7 followed by a vii°6, the latter of which acts as a dominant substitution leading to the I (Elder m. 52, 68, 72, 75, Younger 16). However, in the context of the piece, I believe it is appropriate to view this rather as an inverted dominant seventh chord with the customary 4-3 suspension, missing the root of the chord. For instance, see measures 68-69 of the Madrigal is as follows, reduced and with voice crossing eliminated:

In isolation, the upper (in-line) analysis would be appropriate, but again considering that every other cadence has a V4-3 in that position, I believe the lower (out-of-line) interpretation is the more logical option.
	Before I return to comparisons between the two pieces, one of the five cadences I just described requires further justification to fit the generalization I made. In measure 52 of the Madrigal, we see the same type of cadence as in the image above, except that the leading tone of the key (and so the third of the V chord) is not in fact raised; note the C? in the upper bass part. However, I posit that this C should be a C#, according to the custom of musica ficta, which would make the (admittedly still rootless) V chord major. After coming to this conclusion, I looked through editions of the piece online, and found one that contains the same accidental (Ferrabosco 20). Such disagreements are to be expected when examining music from an era when accidentals were sometimes left up to the discretion of the performers; in keeping with this tradition, I have made my own edit to the score I analyzed to reflect this harmonic decision.
All this to say that, indeed, every cadence in both pieces is either authentic or deceptive, with a 4-3 suspension on the V chord. Of course, the similarities are limited; as mentioned above, the Elder was much more versatile with the keys he cadenced in. On that note, though, it would be unfair not to mention my favorite moment in the Fantasia, which occurs in measures 52-54. The Younger tonicizes the subdominant—that is, F major—starting in measure 49. Then the harmony moves as if approaching a cadence (I—V4-3) but instead of going to an F major chord to complete the cadence, it moves to G4-3, which functions as the V of the C major that follows. So although this not a deceptive cadence by the traditional definition, it most certainly deceives the hearer’s ears, almost as if the Younger were teasing his audience by nearly cadencing outside of the key.
Moving on from the V chord of each cadence to the final chord, we find the exact opposite contrast from what I would have expected. In the voice-leading rules derived from the music of baroque composers such as Bach, doubling the third of a chord is generally avoided, especially at cadences. I would therefore expect the Madrigal to double the third more often than the Fantasia, since the latter is part of a later development of renaissance music. However, of the fourteen cadences in the Madrigal, only three double the third on the final chord, and of those three, one of them is a deceptive cadence; the doubled third can here be justified by the fact that it is the tonic of the key and therefore lends some stability. On the other hand, four of the Fantasia’s eight cadences double the third. Similarly, later customs tend to favor perfect authentic cadences over imperfect, especially for the final cadence; but while the third is the most common choice for the highest note of the I chord in both pieces, the Fantasia is the one to end on such a cadence, while the Madrigal end on a perfect authentic. Of course, with this very small sample size, I certainly do not claim to be discovering an unexpected trend; rather, I think these patterns underscore the reality that many of today’s rules had yet to be developed when either of these pieces were written, and so composers simply let the chords form as they would according to their contrapuntal techniques.
The phrase-by-phrase effect created in the Madrigal by the frequent cadences is equally present in terms of imitation and homophony. The Elder tends to introduce a melodic idea, pass it around three to six of the parts in rapid succession, then move on to the next motive. We see this clearly for the first time in measures 19-22, with the phrase marked in red brackets, and again in 37-41. There is occasional weaving together of motives; in the latter section, the same motive is repeated in the top line in measures 47-49 in double time, while some less distinctive imitation is occurring in lower voices. However, for the most part, sections of imitation are easily separable, as are instances of homophony; moving on to measures 53-61, we have two very clear four-voice homophonic phrases in immediate succession. Only toward the end of the piece do we see any real intertwining of techniques, and even that is very structured and neat: measure 73 begins a series of three three-bar phrases in which two voices share a homophonic line while a third accompanies them with a repeating motive (marked with angled brackets). Again because of the poetic constraints of the piece, contrapuntal concepts like imitation serve rather to distinguish sections from one another than to interconnect them.
Just the opposite is true in the Younger’s Fantasia. A simple three-note motive with a dotted rhythm (first instance: third line, measures 8-9) recurs throughout the piece, along with a longer phrase (first instance: sixth line, measures 8-11). Other motives see less consistent usage, but are nevertheless generally present for much longer periods than the one-off ideas in the Madrigal. Overall, in concert with the consistent tonal center, the repeated motives serve to tie the piece together into a unit; they showcase the Younger’s ability to combine, layer and recombine a few melodic ideas throughout the piece in a way that maintains a smooth-flowing texture without sacrificing interest. In the same vein, the Younger employs homophony very sparingly, and what little one does hear is far from overt. In contrast with the Madrigal’s clear, successive four-voice phrases, the Fantasia’s homophony functions more as an augmentation of a single melodic line. In measures 32-34, the two treble lines move in parallel thirds in an iteration of one of the two main motives of the piece; rather than interrupting the texture of the piece, it merely brings out the motive from among the other voices. This slight break from polyphony is not a major event in the Fantasia but simply one of the techniques the Younger employs to maintain interest in his repeated themes.
So far, I have explained several of the differences between these pieces by reference to the presence or absence of lyrics. While this is indeed an important factor, there is a related issue that should not be left unmentioned. The Elder constructed his Madrigal not only to fit its lyrics, but also (unlike the Younger) with vocalists in mind. While both pieces can be played by a viol consort, the Madrigal was not originally written for such an ensemble. This has little bearing on the melodic contour of the voices, since the style of the Fantasia does not take advantage of the greater dexterity of the instruments; with a few exceptions, the lines are smooth and easily singable. The Younger does, however, capitalize on the viols’ ability to play long phrases without the need for a breath (this is an additional factor in allowing for the less frequent cadences mentioned earlier). 
The intended instrumentation of both pieces is most easily seen in the range of the voices. The total range of the Fantasia spans three octaves plus a fourth, while the Madrigal reaches only two octaves plus a minor sixth; the highest voice in the Madrigal stays within a mere octave, while the narrowest voice in the Fantasia has a minor tenth and its lower three voices all span a full perfect twelfth. These range constraints have a bearing on the location of the highest and lowest notes in the piece, which in this era  were often placed with specific intention to mark the climax of the piece or similar event. In this case, the highest note in the Madrigal occurs many times and is therefore not significant, but the lowest (F# below the bass staff) is heard only twice—once on “heavens lament me” and later on “my grief” (Elder, measures 43, 65). This is a clear yet subtle madrigalism that is especially effective given that most of the poem does not lend itself to tone painting. Similarly, the lowest note in the Fantasia is too frequent to have any special impact, but the highest (Bb above the treble staff) is played just once, in measure 78. This is a fascinating choice because it does not occur at a climax, as one might expect, but rather in a lull, in a short, sweet interlude in which only the three upper voices are playing. Of course, this has its own unique impact and can certainly be considered a deliberate choice on the part of the composer.
     
